# Form Design

## What exactly is form design?

Form design is about creating a web form where your site visitors can enter and submit information while keeping the layout, format, UX, appearance and other factors in mind. A well-designed form improves the user experience and increases conversions, which means that you turn users into customers.

The design of your form influences your website's overall user experience (UX), affecting the number of happy visitors and conversions. A well-designed form demonstrates to users that your company is helpful, thoughtful, professional, technologically savvy and enjoyable to work with.

On the other hand, a poorly designed form may result in page and website abandonment or a frustrated user, resulting in a drop in conversions and sales. Expedia, for example, discovered that one extraneous form field box alone was costing them $12 million in profits per year! In this reading, you'll learn about some of the best practices and guidelines of form design.

## Form design best practices and guidelines

**1. Keep forms simple and straightforward**
Avoid adding any unnecessary fields or questions. Include only the required information in your form.

**2. Use one column**
When possible, use a single-column web form layout — this is especially important when creating long multi-step forms. Single-column layouts are more straightforward for visitors to follow, understand, complete and submit than forms with multiple columns.

**3. Clearly label your form**
Give your form a title that lets your visitors know what will happen once they submit it. For example, a simple form title like "create an account" clearly states that once a visitor submits their information, they will have created an account.

**4. Sort your form fields from the simplest to the most difficult**
Begin your form with the most straightforward field questions (such as name and email) before moving on to the more time-consuming questions, for example, billing and shipping information. When visitors start filling out your form and think, "OK, I can quickly add my name and email," they are far less likely to leave the page since they have already decided to commit.

**5. Make use of inline form field validation**
Inline form validation is a procedure that checks a visitor's information in real time as they fill out the form. Suppose your visitors enter incorrect information into a field, such as an incorrect credit card number or email. An error message will show below or inside the form field, alerting the visitor to their mistake and allowing them to quickly correct it and move on to the next question.

**6. The text should be aligned to the left**
Align all your text – including queries and labels - to the left side of the form so that it is easy for your visitors to read and complete. Researchers at the University of Basel observed that aligning text on the left side, above the form field box, decreases the time required to fill out the form. This alignment reduces the time a user's eyes have to move around, making the form easier to read.

**7. Do not request phone numbers**
Unless collecting your visitors' phone numbers is critical, for example, a quote request or product demo, don't include it in your form. Asking for your visitors' phone numbers can create a feeling of suspicion unless they know a legitimate reason for the request. When possible, request an email address instead and use that to contact your visitors with their permission. Alternatively, make the phone number field in your form voluntary.

**8. Use browser auto-fill**
Completing specific form fields is now quicker than ever, thanks to autofill features in browsers that draw from prior data entered from a visitor's device, like their first and last name. To help your visitors speed up the completion process, it's best practice to title each field with a word that browsers will recognize.

**9. Create mobile-friendly forms**
Many people browse, purchase products, and complete forms on their mobile devices, which is why mobile-friendly form design is critical. This helps visitors to your website to easily view a site on any mobile device and ensures that all the form information fits the screen size.

**10. Error messages should be positive**
Make sure to sound positive when creating web form error messages. This is a great way to ensure that only correct information is submitted. Never blame the user; instead, use clear and concise language and include information that guides the visitor to the error. This way, they know precisely where it is and how it needs to be corrected.

**11. Include smart defaults**
Enabling smart defaults is another excellent way to help speed up the form completion process while maintaining accuracy. Smart defaults use information like your user's current location to instantly enter details like city or town, saving them time.

**12. For long forms, add progress bars**
Have you ever filled out a long form or survey and thought, "How many other questions are there?" Progress bars show how many questions your visitors must answer. They will give them a clue of how long it will take them to finish the task and may act as a form of motivation to finish the task at hand. These are especially helpful on long, multi-step forms.

**13. Use reCAPTCHAs rather than CAPTCHAs**
Have you ever been asked to look at a relatively challenging image with numbers and letters and then to type those numbers and letters into a form field to confirm you're "not a robot" after completing a form? CAPTCHAs are used to identify SPAM and bots. They can, however, be time-consuming and frustrating to finish. They are still helpful; you may want to include this additional security measure in your forms. If this is the case, you should use reCAPTCHAs in your forms instead. reCAPTCHAs identify fake accounts and bots not only successfully but also require that a visitor checks only a box before submitting a form. A CAPTCHA uses lettering for security whereas a ReCAPTCHA asks the user identify elements of images.

**14 .Allow users to navigate to the following form field by tab**
There's no reason your form shouldn't support keyboard shortcuts, as there are many available. A good practice is to allow visitors to use the tab key on their keyboard to move to the following form field on your forms without having to take their hands off their keyboards.

# Components in UI Design

- a component is any part of your design that can be logically grouped which is thought of as stand alone and can be reused.

**Design Components** : A design system is, A set of reusable pre made design components and patterns that can be used to design products at scale similar to a brand style guide. They contain rules and best practice behaviors for design components.

- most successful design systems frequently have the following features. Design guidelines, a design pattern library, a UI kit or component library and finally process design guidelines.

- So a **design pattern library** is a collection of accepted and widely used design patterns or essential repository and according to the interaction design foundation. A **pattern** is the recurrence of multiple design elements that collaborate with one another. Note that these elements can be shapes, lines and colors. A **UI kit** also called a component library or a collection of UI focused components consists of buttons. Widget and more. With the aid of these resources. Teams can quickly produce ui friendly designs and lastly the **process design guidelines** is a collection of accepted and widely used patterns such as a design pattern library. This assists designers in interpreting design principles while they carry out a task.

# Additional Resources

The following resources are additional reading materials that introduce you to navigation menu icons, best practices for designing navigation, icon design principles, usability and evaluating interactive design. These will add to the knowledge that you’ve gained in this lesson.

**Design principles**
[An article on form design and best principles](https://xd.adobe.com/ideas/principles/web-design/best-practices-form-design/)

[Design systems explained in detail](https://www.nngroup.com/articles/design-systems-101/)

[Current inspirational design systems](https://uxplanet.org/10-most-popular-design-systems-to-learn-from-in-2022-for-ux-designers-18a24843a860)

**Design tips**
[Good tips to help Improve any Online Form](https://uxplanet.org/the-18-must-do-principles-in-the-form-design-fe89d0127c92)

[Component design and ways of using them](https://wereheavyweight.medium.com/how-were-using-component-based-design-5f9e3176babb)
